Now that you have a conceptual overview of how the perceptron works, I'm going to go through the math
and the mechanics of deep learning in more detail.
Fortunately, it's not that hard.
In fact, you already know all the math that you need to understand deep learning.
It's just a matter of putting all the pieces together in the right order.
Now, I've broken up this lecture into three parts to make it a little bit more digestible.
This first video will cover what's called forward propagation, and is basically how the input data
are transformed into the output.
So here you see a familiar diagram of the perceptron model, which is actually the fundamental building
block of deep learning.
And you'll learn later on that what makes deep learning deep is that we take exactly this simple model
and repeat it lots and lots of times.
So we take a bunch of these perceptrons and we string them all up together.
Okay.
So quick reminder here.
In this example we have two inputs.
So two features of the real world.
Like maybe this is the number of hours that the students slept and the number of hours that the students
studied.
This is called the bias term here.
These are the weights.
And so this part of the perceptron here this node is implementing a linear weighted sum of the inputs.
And it gives a single number as an output.
So that's the linear part of the computation.
Then that linear output passes through a nonlinear function which we call an activation function.
I want to write out all of the math again to show you a simplification.
So here is the output of the model y hat equals all of the individual inputs in the x's multiplied by
their corresponding weights in the W's.
And then those are summed up together.
And we add to that the bias term and its weight.
Now remember that this term here is simply the dot product between a vector containing the inputs and
a vector containing the weights.
Furthermore, we generally set this bias term to one.
So this term is one.
So we can just drop x0 from the equation.
So this is the linear part which passes through the nonlinear activation function.
And now it turns out that we can actually remove this w0 altogether and simply write sigma of x transpose
w.
So writing out the bias term here explicitly is useful from a conceptual perspective, because it reminds
you that there is a bias, but that bias term can actually be absorbed into the dot product.
Now, I'd like to take a moment to explain why this is the case.
Here I'm simply writing out all of the individual terms from the equation here.
So we expand this summation for m equals two.
And that gives us this expression here.
Now because we know that we can represent the dot product as the matrix multiplication of two vectors.
We can also express the dot product in this form.
Again these are all the same expressions.
I'm just writing them out using different notations.
And now here I can simply augment these two vectors with x0 here and w0 over here and here.
Just as in all of these cases, I'm assuming that x0 is equal to one.
So we simply put a one into this vector of inputs over here.
And so this shows that the bias can be absorbed into the dot product.
Now, the reason why I show all of this is because I'm going to start writing out the computation of
the perceptron using this notation.
So sigma of x transpose W without taking the extra space for the bias term.
But of course you know that the bias term is always included.
So this little model has two inputs, which means this is a 2D input space which means a two dimensional
feature space.
So for now I am setting the activation function to be the identity function, which is actually just
the number one.
So in fact there is no non-linearity in this model.
It's totally linear.
This is just here as a convenient placeholder.
And this is convenient because it means that we can just write out the equation for this model, this
computational graph.
And that's what you see here.
So y hat equals one.
Now this one over here comes from the bias term x0 and times one.
I'm saying the weight to be one here, so implicitly there is a times the orange one over here anyway.
And here we have plus minus two times x1, where minus two is the weight plus one times x2 where one
is this weight over here.
And in fact we can visualize this function in the two dimensional feature space.
So the input space and that looks like this.
So we have two dimensions here x1 and x2 corresponding to the two inputs.
And so each data sample each data point in our data set is a coordinate in this space.
And the input at each coordinate gives a value at that coordinate, which is determined by this function
here, and is represented by this pseudo color bar over here.
So just to make sure that this is clear we can pick a few values in here.
Now the easiest ones to pick are zero and zero.
So we set x one equals x two equals zero.
That's this point at the origin.
So obviously that just gets rid of these two terms.
And then we find that y hat equals one at the origin.
And you know it's not really hard.
It's not really easy to see the exact color value.
But it's plausibly equal to a color value of one.
If you like, you can pause the video and pick a few other values.
For example, maybe x1 equals minus two and x2 equals plus two.
So that's this point here.
I don't really feel like calculating that, but I'm sure it's going to be you know you can tell from
the color it's going to be somewhere around here seven, eight, something like that, maybe nine.
Now you can see that this function in this feature space has positive values and negative values.
So therefore it's also going to have values or range of values where the function is equal to zero.
Or we get a value of zero.
In fact there's a line in this feature space for all the points where y hat equals zero.
And we find this line by setting this equation to zero and finding all of the x1, x2 pairs that satisfy
this equation, and you know it's easiest to compute for these two points on the line.
So just by way of a quick confirmation, let's see that when x1 equals zero.
So now we're on this y axis line here.
When x1 equals zero this term drops out.
And then to get this equation to be equal to zero this needs to be x2 needs to be minus one so that
this is one plus minus one.
Okay.
So that's this one.
Of course you can you know you can pause the video and compute this here.
I'm sure you will get that when x1 x2 equals zero x1 must equal one half.
Actually we can already see that very quickly from looking at the equation.
Now why do we care about this line?
This line is important because it is the separating hyperplane or the decision boundary.
It cuts this feature space into two discrete parts.
And these two discrete parts are the two categories, or sometimes called classes.
So now the idea is that any samples, any data points in this part of the feature space will be labeled
as category one or class one.
And any combination of x1, x2 values, any input pairs that lie in this part of space will be categorized
as being in class two or category two.
Now this is basically how a linear classifier works.
Now the slope of this line, the slope and the intercept of this line, all of the values of y and so
on.
Those all depend on the values of w here and w0.
So on the bias term and on the weights.
I'm going to talk more about that in a few moments.
But first I want to get back to talking about this activation function.
Here an activation function is a function that maps an input, which is actually the output of the linear
part of the model onto an output, which is the final output of the model.
So the identity function that I used in the previous slide would actually just be a straight line through
this space here.
So the output value equals the input value.
But more generally the idea is that the output of the linear part of the model is the input into this
non-linear activation function.
And from there that gets mapped onto some output value.
Here y hat.
There are many activation functions that have been used in deep learning, perhaps maybe a few dozen
activation functions.
But these three here are the most common activation functions.
And in fact, many of the other activation functions are actually just variants of one of these three.
Now there's a much larger discussion to be had about why we need different activation functions and
when to use which function.
That is a discussion that we are going to have separately later in the course.
But briefly.
The sigmoid is generally used for the final output of the model, and the tangent and ReLU functions
are often used for nodes in the middle of a model.
But importantly, you can see that none of these activation functions is a straight line, so all of
these are non-linear.
For example, if the output of this linear part of the model is, let's say a value of minus four.
So that's the input into the activation function that would be on the x axis down here.
And if this activation function were a sigmoid then the output of the linear component being minus four
would produce an output of the sigmoid function of somewhere close to zero.
And here for the hyperbolic tangent, the output would be around minus one.
Here for ReLU it would be zero.
Now this is an important but subtle point.
Each node in the model is internally computing a linear operation, but the output of that part of the
node is transformed through a non-linearity, and that non-linear component is going to be the input
into the next node in a model.
So the nodes are linear coming in and non-linear going out.
Here you see the same feature space and the same model that we were looking at before.
But now this is just the linear part of the model.
And here we have that linear part pushed through this non-linear sigmoid function over here.
So that you see represented graphically.
And here is how you see it written expressed algebraically.
Now the separating hyperplane or where this function is equal to zero that we saw, you saw that with
the line I drew a few slides ago that well I don't have the line here, but it's in the same exact spot
in this graph and in this graph.
But the sigmoid function added a non-linearity that changed the values of that function.
So here this function, these values are all bound between 0 and 1.
Whereas here these were not actually bound.
So you know I clipped the color scale at minus ten to plus ten.
But these values here can grow arbitrarily large or arbitrarily small negative.
And here these values are clipped between 0 and 1.
And you can also see that most of the values in this graph are at the extremes.
So most of the values are very close to zero or are very close to one.
And that changes the interpretation of the samples in this feature space.
So now the values in this plot are used as probabilities of each sample being drawn from one category.
So when there is a student who slept, you know, this many hours and studied for this many hours,
says the model computes.
So the model is going to say, I compute that there is a 9.9% chance, so a 0.999 chance of this student
passing the exam.
Likewise, if there's a student who slept this much and studied this much, then the model says, I
compute that there's a probability of 0.00327.
You know, whatever this number is down here.
A very small probability of that student passing the exam.
So the student is very likely to fail the exam.
And here towards the decision boundary the model is going to give some probability values some numerical
value that's close to 0.5.
Maybe it's going to be 0.55 for a value around here.
By the way I said earlier on that the zero line is the same in both of these graphs.
That's not entirely correct.
The zero line over here where y hat equals zero, that is transformed into y hat equals 0.5.
So here we have negative values and positive values.
Zero is the decision boundary.
Here all of the numerical values are converted into probabilities.
So the decision boundary is now at 0.5 instead of at zero.
So I apologize if that was confusing earlier.
But again, the point is that the nonlinear activation function doesn't actually change the line.
It doesn't change the location of this boundary, this decision boundary where the function here is
zero, and here the probability is 0.5.
What the nonlinear activation function changed was the numerical values and the extremities of the values.
As you get further and further away from that line, that separating hyperplane.
But that line is fixed.
As long as these weights are the same, that line is fixed.
And why is it fixed?
What makes this line have a particular slope and a particular intercept?
Well of course that comes from the specific values of these weights.
Over here a different set of weights will give a different separating hyperplane with a different slope
and a different intercept.
So these lines here represent the y equals zero lines for different sets of weights.
And so this leads to the problem of how do we pick the right weights.
How do we know where to put this decision boundary.
Well I'm sure you've guessed this solution.
We learn the best set of weights from the training data.
So the learning process happens via back propagation, which is basically just a fancy term for gradient
descent, which you've already learned about.
Now you're going to learn all about backpropagation in a few videos.
But first I need to tell you about errors, losses, and cost functions, and that's coming up in the
next video.
So in this video, I discussed the math and the mechanisms of deep learning in more detail.
I focused on one perceptron, but as you will soon learn, deep learning is really just taking that
one perceptron model and repeating it many, many times linking them all up together.